
SENSOR WALKING STICK FOR BLIND
OBJECTIVE:
IT IS MAINLY DEVELOPED TO HELP THE BLIND PERSON TO MOVE ALONE SAFELY FROM ONE PLACE TO ANOTHER AND TO AVOID ANY OBSTACLES THAT MAY BE ENCOUNTERED.
USERS OF THE PRODUCT:
1.ADMIN
2.CUSTOMER(BLIND)
FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
1.ULTRASONIC SENSOR,VIBRATING MOTOR,BATTERY,ARDUINO NANO,BUZZER,SWITCH,AND A WOODEN STICK OR PLASTIC PIPE IS USED 

2.THIS SMART STICK WARNS THE BLIND PERSON THAT THERE IS AN OBSTACLE OR WALL IN FRONT OF THEM

3JUMPER WIRES ARE CONNECTED TO BUZZER AND VIBRATING MOTOR ON THE STICK

4.TWO ULTRASONIC SENSORS HC SR 04 TO DETECT THE DEPTH BELOW OR THE OBSTACLES IN BETWEEN.

5.OBSTACLES IS DETECTED BY HEARING THE SOUND GENERATED BY THE HEAD PHONE

6.CONNECTIONS ARE DONE FROM CIRCUIT DIAGRAM.
7.CODES ARE UPLOADED

 

PERFORMANCE:
IN SENSOR WALKING STICK,THE OBJECT IS DETECTED WITH THE HELP OF A CAMERA AND ALSO IT MEASURES THE DISTANCE BETWEEN OBJECTS BY USING ULTASONIC SENSOR

WALKING STICKS PROVIDE SUPPORT FOR A USER’S BODY WEIGHT AS THEY TRANSFER WEIGHT FROM THE LEGS TO THE UPPER BODY

 Ultrasonic Blind Walking Stick


Blind stick is an innovative stick designed for visually disabled people for improved navigation. We here propose an advanced blind stick that allows visually challenged people to navigate with ease using advanced technology. The blind stick is integrated with ultrasonic sensor along with light and water sensing. Our proposed project first uses ultrasonic sensors to detect obstacles ahead using ultrasonic waves. On sensing obstacles the sensor passes this data to the microcontroller. The microcontroller then processes this data and calculates if the obstacle is close enough. If the obstacle is not that close the circuit does nothing. If the obstacle is close the microcontroller sends a signal to sound a buzzer. It also detects and sounds a different buzzer if it detects water and alerts the blind. One more feature is that it allows the blind to detect if there is light or darkness in the room. The system has one more advanced feature integrated to help the blind find their stick if they forget where they kept it. A wireless rf based remote is used for this purpose. Pressing the remote button sounds a buzzer on the stick which helps the blind person to find their stick. Thus this system allows for obstacle detection as well as finding stick if misplaced by visually disabled people.

•	Hardware Specifications
•	Atmega Microcontroller
•	HC-SR04 Ultrasonic
•	LDR Sensor 5MM Photoresistor
•	Buzzer
•	RF Tx Rx
•	Encoder IC
•	Decoder IC
•	Crystal Oscillator
•	Resistors
•	Capacitors
•	Transistors
•	Cables and Connectors
•	Diodes
•	PCB and Breadboards
•	LED
•	Transformer/Adapter
•	Push Buttons
•	Switch
•	IC
•	IC Sockets
•	Software Specifications
•	Arduino Compiler
STANDARD FEATURES:
1.IR SENSOR
2.A WATER DETECTION SENSOR
3.PLAYBACK RECORDER INTEGRATED CIRCUIT(IC)
4.GPS 
5.GSM
6.SOS FOR SENDING MESSAGES
SENSOR WALKING STICK DEVELOPMENT:
 
 


DESIGN:
 Abstract  - In this  paper, a  smart walking cane  for  the  visually  challenged  is presented. The proposed device can detect obstacles  as  well  as  water  in  the  user's path.   It  also has  an additional  feature in that it can easily be located by the user in case it is lost or misplaced, and this feature is done using radio frequency waves where there is a radio frequency receiver circuit on the  stick  and  a  separate  radio  frequency transmitter circuit which triggers an alarm on pressing  a  pushbutton.  A  conventional walking cane forms the main frame of the device, upon  which ultrasonic  sensors are mounted at appropriate locations to detect obstacles and the water sensors to  detect water in the path of the user. The mentioned sensors  send  a  signal  to  an  Arduino programmed  chip  that  communicates  with the  alarm unit that  comprises of a  buzzer and  vibrator  that  notify  the  user  of  the obstacle or water in their path. The device is lightweight and is powered by a battery. The overall  design  of  the  device  ensures accuracy,  energy  efficiency  and  easy portability.
OUTPUT BLOCK:
  This  block is  used majorly for  notification, alerting  the  blind  person  of  the  detected obstacle or position of the stick; and water that has been detected ahead of him/her.  When  the  obstacle  from  the  ultrasonic distance  sensor  is  detected,  the microcontroller  in  the  program  execution block sends a signal to the base  of Q1 via current limiting resistors R1; which turns on causing current to  flow through the  buzzer hence alarming.  When water on ground  is detected  by the water  sensor,  the  microcontroller  in  the program execution block sends a signal to the base of Q2 via current limiting resistors R4; which turns on causing current to flow through the vibrator hence vibrating.  When the walking stick is out of reach from the  blind  user, he/she  presses  the  switch sending an RF signal to this circuit making the microcontroller in the program block to send a voltage signal to the base of Q1 via current limiting resistors R1; which turns on causing current to  flow through the  buzzer hence alarming.  Resistors R1 and R4 limit current through the bases of transistors Q1 and Q2 respectively. The  system  also  has  a  RF  transmitter system  that  sends  signals  to  the  RF receiver  on  the  stick  to  trigger  an  alarm when a push button.

EVALUVATION OF THE WALKING STICK:
 The smart  walking  stick was tested  and it produces sound when the obstacle is within a range of 2cm -1m. When  the  water  sensor  touches  water,  a message  is  sent  to  the  visually  impaired individual inform of a vibration.  When  the  search  button  is  pressed,  the sound is activated. This was tested from a distance of up to 10m. A  simple,  cheap,  configurable,  easy  to handle  electronic  guidance  system  is proposed to provide constructive assistance and support for blind and visually impaired persons.  The  system  is  designed, implemented, tested, and verified. The real-time results of the system are encouraging; It revealed an accuracy of,  90% in detecting obstacles.   99% in detecting water.   95% in sending and receiving the RF signals  from  the  transmitter  to  the receiver. The results indicate that the system is  efficient  in  its  ability  to  detect obstacles  and  water  that  may encounter the blind PROJECT TASKS:
Problem Statement In order to furnish a useful, environmentally friendly navigation resource for blind people, more than a few researchers have conducted the extensive variety of lookupworks.Initially, these humans depended solely on others for their simple wants and mobility. Blind humans have used the white cane and skilled puppies for help [2], however these techniques have sure limitations. While white canes are inexpensive, they cannot discover boundaries accurately. The user might also solely be in a position to observe limitations via touch, which leaves them with little time to react to adverse conditions. These options are no longer so efficient, as a skilled canine is expensive, and it may get injured or sick [3]. Thus, these options are no longer efficient. Subsections are introduced and mentioned beneath that describe and analyze the preceding work, primarily based on facets and applied sciences concerned with solely obstacle-detecting digital journey aids (ETAs), or solely impediment detectors alongside function locators and conversation techniques [4]. There are about 37 million blind humans in the world, with more than 15 million blind human beings residing in India. While congestion of barriers can be troublesome for non-visually impaired human beings as well, it is even more challenging for the visually impaired [5,6]. The wants of human beings with visible disabilities are regularly met through exterior assistance. Visually impaired humans may additionally find it hard to navigate via a room or a hallway, barring bumping into objects [7,8]. It can be challenging to avoid obstacles, even with an on-foot stick, due to the fact it can be uncomfortable, inconvenient, and inaccurate. In order to allow blind humans to move freely, a mechanism must be developed to help them with their daily activities.
LOCATION FINDING FOR BLIND PEOPLE USING VOICE NAVIGATION STICK:
Navigation device for the blind people focus on travelling from one location to another. They are avail with navigation stick which provides obstacle detection. The other novel features of the navigation stick are staircase detection and nonformal distance scaling scheme. It also provides information about the floor status. It consists of low power embedded system with ultrasonic sensor and safety indicators. While in navigation mode the stick reaches the destination by avoiding obstacles using ultrasonic and infrared sensor inputs. This dissertation proposes a new navigation stick that constructs the logical map of the surrounding environment, to deduce the priority information to the subject by using audio or voice feedback. The working of the system incorporates three stages, first the location
 USER AND CUSTOMER ABOUT SMART WALKING STICK:
It is worth mentioning at this point that the purpose of this study, which is to design and use a clever and smart walking stick for visually impaired people, is fully realized. The Smart Stick serves as a basic platform for the next generation of assistive devices to help the visually impaired to navigate safely inside and out. It is practical and affordable. It leads to good results in finding obstacles in the user’s path over a distance of 3 m. This system provides a low cost, reliable, portable, low power consumption and a robust navigation solution with short clear response time. Although the system has strong nerves and other components, it has a light weight. Other features of this system can be enhanced by connecting wireless components between the components, thus increasing the range of the ultrasonic sensor and the use of the speed detection technology. While developing such an enabling solution, visually impaired and blind people in all developing countries were at the top of our priorities. The device built into this function can only detect obstacles and moisture. Holes cannot be detected using this device or other types of obstacle. Therefore, a better device can be built using ultrasonic sensors; Arduino Uno and other tools that use audio commandsto alert the user of what is in his or her way. The vibrator can also be added to make it easier to use.Inthe future, some changes to improve system performance will be added. These include: Global Positioning System for GPS. User Location, and GSM modules to communicate the location with a relative or caregiver. It should also include a wide variety of handles for flexible management.
WATER SENSOR :

The water sensor brick is designed for water detection, which can be widely used to detect rainfall, water level, and even leak liquate. The brick is mainly made up of three parts: an electronic brick connector, 1 MΩ resistor, and several rows of bare wires. This sensor works by having a series of exposed trackers connected to the ground, and connected between ground-based tracking sensors. Sensor traces have a weak pull-up resistance of 1 MΩ. The resistor will pull the value of the sensor trace up until the drop of water sensor traces to the bottom track. Believe it or not, this circuit will work with your Arduino digital I/O pins, or you can use it with analog pins to detect the amount of water-generated connections between the ground track and the sensors. This item can judge the water level through a series of interlocking strings to measure a drop of water/size. This sensitive water sensor can easily convert the water amount to an analog signal, and the output analog value can be applied directly to the system function, and then to accomplish the function of a water level alarm. This item has low power consumption, and high sensitivity, which are major features of this module. The High Sensitivity Water Sensor can be compatible with Arduino UNO, Arduino mega2560, Arduino ADK, etc.
VOLTAGE REGULATOR:

The LM7808 series of three terminal positive controls are available in the TO-220 package, with several constant output voltages, making them useful for many different applications. Each type uses an internal current limit, thermal shut-off and protection of a safe working environment, which prevents it from failing. If a sufficient immersion temperature is provided, it can produce an output of more than 1A current. Although it was designed primarily as a fixed power controller, these devices can be used with external components to obtain adjustable voltages and currents shown in Figure 3. One of the main advantages of these voltage regulators is that no matter if the input voltage fluctuates, they will provide a fixed voltage at the output, but the input voltage should not be less than the minimum required voltage of the ICs. The input voltage in any condition must be 2 V to 3 V higher than the output voltage. To get a stable 8 V output from LM7808 as discussed above, it is suggested that the input voltage must be at least 2 to 3 V higher than the output voltage. The IC is a DC device, so the input voltage must be DC. Additionally, to get 1.5 A at the output the input current should be at least 2 A.

 . 
PHOTO DIODE RECEIVER:
The photo diode acts as an IR receiver as it operates when light falls on it. The photo diode is a semiconductor with a P-N junction, which operates in the reverse bias, which means it begins to conduct the current in a backward direction when the light drops on it, and the current flow value is equal to the amount of light. This feature makes it useful for IR detection. The photodiode looks like an LED, with black on the outside which is shown in FIGURE. The black color absorbs the maximum amount of light.
 . 
BUZZER:
The buzzer is a small but effective component for adding audio features to our project/system. It is very small and compact with 2 pins, which is why it can be easily used on bread board, Perf Board and even PCBs, making this a widely used component in many electrical systems. There are two types of buzzers commonly found. The one shown here is a simple buzzer, that if enabled will make a continuous beep sound; another type called a ready-made buzzer that will look bigger and will produce a “Beep. Beep. Beep.” sound due, to the internal oscillating circuit located inside it. But the one shown here is the most widely used because it can be customized with the help of other regions to easily fit into our app. This buzzer can be operated by simply powering it using a DC power supply ranging from 4 V to 9 V. A simple 9 V battery can also be used, but it is recommended that you use a +5 V or +6 V DC controlled SUPpLY.
.  

 
_APPLICATIONS:
1.The smart stick for the blind as the name suggests is a device for the visually impaired.
2.to guide the user to respective destination and avoiding to colloidwith the obstacles.
3.it uses two ultrasonic sensors HC SR 04 to detect the depth below or the obstacles in between.
DISCUSSION:
For further enhancement, our project will be integrated with more powerful sensors which will provide precise information about the detection of obstacles in a wide range. A suitable mobile application will also be developed along with the product design, which can help to identify the location of user, and guide the user the right way by giving voice guidance through headphones connected with the product. Our product will make use of GPS to find the shortest and best path to the destination with the help of Google mapping systems. We will attach GSM in our product, which can help in future for any immediate casualty help. We will make our product more compact by using VLSI technology to design PCB unit.
CONCLUSIONS:
It is worth mentioning at this point that the purpose of this study, which is to design and use a clever and smart walking stick for visually impaired people, is fully realized. The Smart Stick serves as a basic platform for the next generation of assistive devices to help the visually impaired to navigate safely inside and out. It is practical and affordable. It leads to good results in finding obstacles in the user’s path over a distance of 3 m. This system provides a low cost, reliable, portable, low power consumption and a robust navigation solution with short clear response time. Although the system has strong nerves and other components, it has a light weight. Other features of this system can be enhanced by connecting wireless components between the components, thus increasing the range of the ultrasonic sensor and the use of the speed detection technology. While developing such an enabling solution, visually impaired and blind people in all developing countries were at the top of our priorities. The device built into this function can only detect obstacles and moisture. Holes cannot be detected using this device or other types of obstacle. Therefore, a better device can be built using ultrasonic sensors; Arduino Uno and other tools that use audio commands to alert the user of what is in his or her way. The vibrator can also be added to make it easier to use. In the future, some changes to improve system performance will be added. These include: Global Positioning System for GPS User Location, and GSM modules to communicate the location with a relative or caregiver. It should also include a wide variety of handles for flexible management.

 
